=== PAGE 15 ===
"RDNA3" Instruction Set Architecture
The RDNA3 device includes a data-parallel processor array, a command processor, a memory controller, and
other logic (not shown). The command processor reads commands that the host has written to memory-
mapped registers in the system-memory address space. The command processor sends hardware-generated
interrupts to the host when the command is completed. The memory controller has direct access to all device
memory and the host-specified areas of system memory. To satisfy read and write requests, the memory
controller performs the functions of a direct-memory access (DMA) controller, including computing memory-
address offsets based on the format of the requested data in memory.
In the RDNA3 environment, a complete application includes two parts:
ò a program running on the host processor, and
ò programs, called shader programs or kernels, running on the RDNA3 processor.
The RDNA3 programs are controlled by a driver running on the host that:
ò sets internal base-address and other configuration registers,
ò specifies the data domain on which the GPU is to operate,
ò invalidates and flushes caches on the GPU, and
ò causes the GPU to begin execution of a program.
1.2.1. Work-group Processor (WGP)
The processor array is the heart of the GPU. The array is organized as a set of work-group processor (WGP)
pipelines, each independent from the others, that operate in parallel on streams of floating-point or integer
data. The work-group processor pipelines can process data or, through the memory controller, transfer data to,
or from, memory. Computation in a work-group processor pipeline can be made conditional. Outputs written
to memory can also be made conditional.
When it receives a request, the work-group processor pipeline loads instructions and data from memory,
begins execution, and continues until the end of the kernel. As kernels are running, the GPU hardware
automatically fetches instructions from memory into on-chip caches; software plays no role in this. Kernels
can load data from off-chip memory into on-chip general-purpose registers (GPRs) and caches.
The GPU devices can detect floating point exceptions and can generate interrupts to the host. In particular,
they detect IEEE-754 floating-point exceptions in hardware; these can be recorded for post-execution analysis.
The GPU hides memory latency by keeping track of potentially hundreds of work-items in various stages of
execution, and by overlapping compute operations with memory-access operations.
1.2.2. Data Sharing
The processors may share data between different work-items. Data sharing can boost performance. The figure
below shows the memory hierarchy that is available to each work-item. The actual number of GPRs may differ
from what is shown in the image below.
1.2. Hardware Overview 6 of 597

=== PAGE 16 ===
"RDNA3" Instruction Set Architecture
Figure 2. Shared Memory Hierarchy
1.2.2.1. Local Data Share (LDS)
Each work-group processor (WGP) has a 128kB memory space that enables low-latency communication
between work-items within a work-group, or the work-items within a wave; this is the local data share (LDS).
This memory is configured with 64 banks, each with 512 entries of 4 bytes. The shared memory contains 64
integer atomic units to enable fast, unordered atomic operations. This memory can be used as a software cache
for predictable re-use of data, a data exchange machine for the work-items of a work-group, or as a cooperative
way to enable efficient access to off-chip memory. A single work-group may allocate up to 64kB of LDS space.
1.2.2.2. Global Data Share (GDS)
The AMD RDNA3 devices use a 4kB global data share (GDS) memory that can be used by waves of a kernel on
all WGPs. This memory provides 128 bytes per cycle of memory access to all the processing elements. It
provides full access to any location for any processor. The shared memory contains 2 integer atomic units to
enable fast, unordered atomic operations. This memory can be used as a software cache to store important
control data for compute kernels, reduction operations, or a small global shared surface. Data can be
preloaded from memory prior to kernel launch and written to memory after kernel completion. The GDS block
contains support logic for unordered append/consume and domain launch ordered append/consume
operations to buffers in memory. These dedicated circuits enable fast compaction of data or the creation of
complex data structures in memory.
1.2.3. Device Memory
The AMD RDNA3 devices offer several methods for access to off-chip memory from the processing elements
1.2. Hardware Overview 7 of 597

=== PAGE 36 ===
"RDNA3" Instruction Set Architecture
Field Bit Description
Pos
EXCP 8:0 Status bits of which exceptions have occurred. These bits are sticky and
accumulate results until the shader program clears them. These bits are
accumulated regardless of the setting of EXCP_EN. These can be read or
written without shader privilege.
Bit Exception
0 invalid
1 Input Denormal
2 Divide by zero
3 overflow
4 underflow
5 inexact
6 integer divide by zero
7 address watch
8 memory violation
SAVECTX 10 A bit set by the host command via GRBM (or context-save/restore unit)
indicating that this wave must jump to its trap handler and save its context.
This bit should be cleared by the trap handler using S_SETREG.
ILLEGAL_INST 11 An illegal instruction has been detected. If a trap handler is present and the
wave is not in the trap handler: jump to the trap handler; Otherwise, send an
interrupt and halt.
ADDR_WATCH1-3 14:12 Indicates that address watch 1, 2 or 3 have been hit. [12]=addr_watch1.
Addr_watch0 is indicated by the existing bit TRAPSTS.EXCP[7].
BUFFER_OOB 15 Buffer Out Of Bounds indicator.
Set when a buffer (MUBUF, MTBUF) instruction requests an address that is
out of bounds. Does not cause a trap. Status bit is sticky.
HOST_TRAP 16 Trap handler has been called to service a host trap. Trap may simultaneously
have been called to handle other traps as well
WAVE_START 17 Trap handler has been called before the first instruction of a new wave.
WAVE_END 18 Trap handler has been called after the last instruction of a wave.
TRAP_AFTER_INST 20 Trap handler has been called due to "trap after instruction" mode
3.4.10. Time
There are two methods for measuring time in the shader:
ò "TIME" - measure cycles in graphics core clocks (20 bit counter)
ò "REALTIME" - measure time based on a fixed frequency, constantly running clock (typically 100MHz),
providing a 64bit value.
Shader programs have access to a free-running clock counter in order to measure the duration of portions of a
waveÆs execution. This counter can be read via: "S_GETREG S0, SHADER_CYCLES" and returns a 20-bit cycle
counter value. This counter is not synchronized across different SIMDs and should only be used to measure
time-delta within one wave. Reading the counter is handled through the SALU which has a typical latency of
around 8 cycles.
For measuring time between different waves or SIMDs, or to reference a clock that does not stop counting
when the chip is idle, use "REALTIME". Real-time is a clock counter that comes from the clock-generator and
runs at a constant speed, regardless of the shader or memory clock speeds. This counter can be read by:
3.4. Wave State Registers 27 of 597

=== PAGE 49 ===
"RDNA3" Instruction Set Architecture
ò SMEM
ò VALU
May also be in a clause ("clause internal instructions"):
ò S_DELAY_ALU is legal inside a clause (internal) but is pointless. ** S_DELAY_ALU must not occur within a
VALU clause.
ò S_NOP and S_SLEEP may be used inside a clause, but the first instruction of the clause must be the clause-
type instruction (ALU, memory).
Cannot be in a clause:
ò Instructions of a different type those of the clause type are illegal
ò S_CLAUSE
ò S_ENDPGM
ò SALU, Export, branch, message, GDS, lds_param_load, lds_direct_load
ò S_WAITCNT, S_WAIT_IDLE, S_WAIT_DEPCTR
S_CLAUSE defines both the total length of the clause, and how often it should be broken to allow other waves a
chance to go. For instance, it could say: clause of 16 instructions, but break after every 4th to allow a higher
priority wave to get access to the execution unit. "clause internal instructions" count against this clause size.
If a clause defines regular clause breaks (e.g. a clause of 16 instructions, but break every 4th), the first
instruction of each sub-clause (every 4 instructions) must be of the clause-type, not a "clause internal
instruction". Each group of instructions must have at least two of the clause-type of instructions. E.g. a clause of
12 VALU instructions broken up into 4 groups of 3 instructions - each group of 3 instructions must have at least two
VALU instructions. Clause groups with only 1 VALU instruction per group make no sense - they are no longer a clause.
If the first instruction in a VALU clause has EXEC==0, then the clause is ignored and instructions are issued as
if there were no clause. If the VALU clause starts with EXEC!=0 but EXEC becomes zero in the middle of the
clause, the clause continues until the last instruction of the specified clause.
If an S_DELAY_ALU is needed before starting a clause, the order must be:
S_DELAY_ALU // must not come immediately after S_CLAUSE - that inst declares clause type
S_CLAUSE
<first instruction in clause>
If the first instruction after S_CLAUSE is skipped (e.g. due to EXEC==0, or VMEM-load skipped due to EXEC==0
and VMcnt==0) then then a clause is not started. Subsequent instructions within what would have been the
clause that are not skipped and are still executed but individually, not as part of a clause.
5.2.1. Clause Breaks
The following conditions can break a clause:
1. VALU exception (trap) breaks a VALU clause
2. Host commands to wave (halt, resume, single step, etc) breaks all active clauses.
Context-save breaks clauses of affected waves.
This allows the host to read and write SGPRs & VGPRs while debugging. If clauses were not broken by host
5.2. Instruction Clauses 40 of 597

=== PAGE 52 ===
